---
layout: post
title:  "Wa-Tor"
date:   2021-12-03 7:52:05 -0400
categories: apprenticeship
---

[Wa-Tor][wator-wiki] is a simulation where you have an ecosystem of 
fish and sharks. The fish spend their lives reproducing and the sharks 
spend their lives eating the fish–both trying to survive. Of course, 
the only case where the sharks survive is when the ecosystem is in perfect 
harmony; sharks and fish reproduce at the perfect rate and there are just
enough fish to satisfy the sharks' hunger.

I've been trying to do the Wa-Tor simulation as a Kata, but it turns out
implementing this simulation as a whole is more like a small project–not
exactly a 10-minute exercise.

However, just like the Bowling Game Kata only implements some part of a 
bowling game (the score for example), the Wa-Tor Kata could implement
some part of the simulation.

### Fish Kata

The Fish in Wa-Tor do only two things:
1. Move to an adjacent square if there is one available
2. Reproduce every N moves

This could most likely be implemented as a kata. It's small enough to be
able to stay focused on, but there are still two things you're looking at:
moving and reproducing.

### Shark Kata

The Sharks in Wa-Tor have a few more rules than fish:
1. Move to an adjacent square:
   - If a square has a fish, move to that square and eat the fish.
   - If no squares have a fish, move to an adjacent square if there is one available.
2. Reproduce every N moves
3. When a fish is eaten, gain some E amount of energy.
4. Lose some amount of energy on every move.
5. When energy reaches 0, the shark dies.

I thought about doing a Shark Kata, but there are just too many rules 
that need to be implemented: moving, reproducing, eating, gaining and losing
energy. It's possible that this could be broken down though. Maybe a
"move" kata?

### Chronon Kata

In Wa-Tor, each position on the board is referred to as a Chronon.

Both Sharks and Fish need to move at some point. So maybe a kata could be 
done around selecting which Chronon to move to next:
1. Only adjacent Chronons can be selected.
2. If the unit is a shark and there is a fish available, choose that fish's Chronon.
3. Otherwise, choose any empty Chronon.
4. If there are no empty Chronons, then choose the unit's current Chronon.

This seems like a good start for a Kata. There is a single focus: choose a 
Chronon. The rule set seems large enough for a Kata, but not too complicated
where it would be too long of an exercise.

So far our Candidates are: Fish Kata and Chronon Kata!

[wator-wiki]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wa-Tor