---
layout: post
title:  "Gensyms"
date:   2021-10-15 7:52:05 -0400
categories: clojure
---

There are lots of tools available to help us write macros. One in particular is
`gensym`, which I'm like 96% sure means "Generate Symbol," but I can't seem
to find a straight answer anywhere.

### What is a gensym?

`gensym` is used to create unique symbols. This can be useful in scenarios 
where symbols can conflict with one another, like in macros!

````clojure
=> (gensym)
G__2045
=> (gensym)
G__2048
````

We can see that back-to-back calls will give us two symbols starting with `G__`
and what seems like some random number. This number isn't so random, though. 
If we keep calling `gensym`, we will see that the number keep going up!

### Named Symbols

You may be saying to yourself right about now, "Okay but I don't like the 
`G__` part. It's ugly and I wanna put something else there like 
'Fluffy Unicorn'." Okay fine. Have it your way...

````clojure
user=> (gensym "Fluffy Unicorn")
Fluffy Unicorn2364
user=> (gensym "Fluffy Unicorn")
Fluffy Unicorn2367
````

Wait, that symbol has a space in it! Is that even allowed?! Maybe... depends
on how you want to use it. But `gensym` allows it! Of course, you could always
just use `(gensym "FluffyUnicorn")` instead.

### Hash Shortcut

You may also be saying to yourself, "This whole `(gensym ...)` syntax is way 
too clunky. I don't wanna have to put that all over my code." There's a 
solution to that as well! 

Simply place a `#` at the end of the name of your auto-gensym. You'll also 
need to use a syntax quote for this one.

````clojure
user=> `(FluffyUnicorn#)
(FluffyUnicorn__2369__auto__)
user=> `(FluffyUnicorn#)
(FluffyUnicorn__2372__auto__)
````

### Breaking Gensym

So `gensym` will _always_ create a unique symbol? Well, not _always_. Unless 
you have some weird naming going on, you shouldn't have any conflicts.

````clojure
user=> (gensym)
G__2389
user=> (gensym)
G__2392
user=> (def G__2395 "Code Goblin")
#'user/G__2395
user=> (gensym)
G__2395
````

In the REPL, the first two calls tells us how these numbers are incrementing. 
Next, we predict the name of the next `gensym` and define something with that 
name. When we call `gensym` again, this produces a symbol with the same name 
as our defined symbol!

This is kinda cool, and while it technically _could_ cause issues, 
it should work fine for just about every situation you'd use it in. 
Just don't name things like `G__1234` or `FluffyUnicorn__4321__auto__`.

### The Inner Workings

So how does `gensym` actually work? How does it always generate a unique symbol 
and why does it keep incrementing? Why is it that we can generate a symbol
that's already defined? Let's take a look at `gensym`'s code.

````clojure
(defn gensym
  ([] (gensym "G__"))
  ([prefix-string] 
   (. clojure.lang.Symbol (intern (str prefix-string (str (. clojure.lang.RT (nextID))))))))
````

We see that the prefix defaults to `G__`, which makes sense.
`clojure.lang.Symbol` and `intern` both help with converting to a symbol, 
but `nextID` is where the real magic happens!

````java
static AtomicInteger id;
...
public static int nextID() {
    return id.getAndIncrement();
}
````

Turns out this is actually a Java function that does one simple task: 
`getAndIncrement` the `id`. That explains why the numbers keep going up! It 
also explains why we can create a symbol that seems to conflict with a `gensym`,
though it should never create a symbol that conflicts with itself.