---
layout: post
title:  "More on Clojure Compilation"
date:   2021-12-27 7:52:05 -0400
categories: clojure java apprenticeship
---

A few days ago I wrote about how you can 
[compile Clojure code][clojure-compilation] into jar files.
Well, I'd like to take a closer look at how functions are exported
and how they look in Java code.

Let's take a look at this simple "Hello, World!" program.

````clojure
(ns hello-world.core)

(defn hello [subject]
  (println (str "Hello, " subject "!")))

(defn -main []
  (hello "World"))
````

Running this program will print "Hello, World!" out to the console. 
Now I want to be able to do a few things with the jar that this code generates:
- Invoke main
- Invoke hello from a 'core' object
- Invoke hello statically

### Setting up Main

Assuming `project.clj` has already been set up, the only thing left to do
is add `:gen-class` to the file's namespace.

````clojure
(ns hello-world.core
  (:gen-class))
; ...
````

After compilation, we can see some Java class files have been generated in 
`/target/classes/hello_world`–one of these will be named core.class.
If we open this up, we see some Java code has been generated with our main method.

````java
package hello_world;
// ...
public class core {
    // ...
    public static void main(String[] var0) {
        // Implementation ...
    }
}
````

### Setting up Non-Static Hello

Back in our Clojure core.clj file, we'll need to add a new method to export
in our Java class and update `:gen-class` with a `:methods` option.

````clojure
(ns hello-world.core
  (:gen-class
    :methods [[hello [String] void]]))
; ...
(defn hello [subject]
  (println (str "Hello, " subject "!")))

(defn -hello [_ subject] (hello subject))
; ...
````

Now what does that `:methods` setting mean? `:methods` is an array of methods
that are to be exported from the module upon compilation. Here, we're exporting
a method named `hello` that accepts a Java `String` and returns `void`.

Because we named our method `hello` in `:methods`, we need a corresponding
Clojure function that starts with a dash: `-hello`.

While it may seem redundant to define the function twice, this is necessary
in order for the function to be added to the jar.

You may have noticed that `-hello` takes two parameters, where the first is 
ignored. Why is that? Let's look at the core.class file.

````java
package hello_world;
// ...
public class core {
    private static final Var hello__var = Var.internPrivate("hello-world.core", "-hello");
    // ...
    public void hello(String var1) {
        Var var10000 = hello__var;
        Object var2 = var10000.isBound() ? var10000.get() : null;
        if (var2 != null) {
            ((IFn)var2).invoke(this, var1);
        } else {
            throw new UnsupportedOperationException("hello (hello-world.core/-hello not defined?)");
        }
    }
    // ...
}
````

In the autogenerated class, we have a reference to the Clojure `-hello` function
and `((IFn)var2).invoke(this, var1);` within the Java `hello` method for that function.
Essentially what this is doing is executing the `-hello` function with
a `this` parameter as the first parameter and the and the actual parameter 
that was passed to the `hello` Java function will come after that.

This is very similar to how the first parameter would work in a `deftype`
function, referencing the object.

### Setting up Static Hello

There are only a couple differences between compiling a static and 
non-static Clojure function. Here's how you might set up a static hello function:

````clojure
(ns hello-world.core
  (:gen-class
    :methods [[hello [String] void]
              ^{:static true} [static_hello [String] void]]))

(defn hello [subject]
  (println (str "Hello, " subject "!")))
(def -static_hello hello)
; ...
````

Since we already have a hello function declared, we must name the static 
version something different: `static_hello`. In our `:methods` declaration,
we indicate that the function is static with `^{:static true}`. 

When we create our `-static_hello` function, we can just set it to our 
existing `hello` function. This means that `-static_hello` only has one 
parameter, as opposed to our `-hello` function. This is because static methods
don't require an object reference parameter.

If we look back at core.class, we can see exactly how this function is declared
as well as the call to `invoke`, which only takes one parameter (without the `this` reference).

````java
package hello_world;
// ...
public class core {
    // ...
    public static void static_hello(String var0) {
        Var var10000 = static_hello__var;
        Object var1 = var10000.isBound() ? var10000.get() : null;
        if (var1 != null) {
            ((IFn)var1).invoke(var0);
        } else {
            throw new UnsupportedOperationException("static_hello (hello-world.core/-static_hello not defined?)");
        }
    }
    // ...
}
````

Now we're ready to compile. Running `lein uberjar` should create a jar
file with `main`, `hello`, and `static_hello` functions!

[clojure-compilation]: https://brandoncorrea.github.io/clojure/apprenticeship/2021/12/22/clojure-compilation.html